
## RUN, HOP, FLY AND THEN CRASH ##


<br/>
A few days back I got this sudden urge to fly. I looked up a number of options and decided that paragliding was the safest option yet close to free fall thrill. I got enrolled in temple pilots’ school for paragliding and the sun on the first day of training was to rise soon. But before I dive into the events of the said day, I should start with events from the night before.
After a week-long busy schedule, all my colleagues decided it was a good idea to spend the evening drinking and dancing. I was promised I would be in bed by 1030. Somehow I didn’t find that believable yet I conformed. What with the Indian habit of being late, the whole affair started around 830. There was no blooming way I’d be back by 12 let alone being in bed peacefully. I had ruined the next day already. Well after lot of laughing and watching our teachers all drunk and blabbering, we returned around 1230. After quickly packing for the next day, I went to sleep around 115.

As per my recollection then, I was supposed to reach this place around 630. So I got up before the crack of dawn and was off by around 530. Three things were pivotal to my condition later that morning.

1. I didn’t have enough sleep the last night.
2. My service provider (reliance of course) chose an auspicious day two days back, when they reduced my balance from Rs. 105 to Rs. 6. Apparently, it’s my mistake when their computer goes bonkers.
3. I asked a guy about to answer nature’s most important call for directions. Never do that!! They seek revenge for stopping them or maybe all of their concentration is elsewhere, I don’t know, still is a topic open for discussion.

The gist of it is I was off earlier than I was normally required to, right on time according to my schedule, and nature had yet another random idea about it, we’ll see.

Oddly enough, we don’t really notice the absence of something. A stray signboard, a funny banner; THAT will catch our eye but the absence of a trivial thing wouldn’t. In the morning cold, I kept going for about 45 minutes, barely able to see. I was also low on gas and was constantly searching for a re-fuelling station. I finally found one, no problem there. Little did I know it’d be of so much use later. I called up the guy organizing the whole thing for further directions. My major landmark was the tollbooth. I found it alright, also went on of 3-5 minutes as instructed, but when 3 turned to 10 and 10 to 15, I was in a fix. My second landmark was to be a CRPF outpost, but it was too stubborn to come out of hiding. One person I asked pointed me in the direction I was already going and told me I’d find it about 8 kms ahead. I followed faithfully and went on for quite some time. I felt like I should confirm once again. This is where reliance comes in. like big boss controlling my life, I received a message saying I had just enough balance to make one call. I decided to call my friend to recharge my phone. I tried to sound genuinely urgent in my request. But that idiot was half asleep and said yes almost reflexively. That was the last call I could make in the hour to come (damn you vinit). With no way to talk to anyone, I started heading back, to see if I missed any turn or anything.

I reached the tollbooth again and asked the guys over there about a nearby CRPF outpost. I don’t know if it was my appearance or the gloves I was wearing along with the haircut, but somehow I think they were convinced I was some dude from another division on some inspection. They were overly kind to explain me where the closest outpost was. Turned out it was 60kms away. I was a little shocked to hear that. Given that my landmark was that outpost, there was a chance that I was in the wrong place. I added, “I need to go to Talegaon”. The guards eagerly replied, “Yes, yes, that’s the place”. Now when the locals tell you they don’t know about any CRPF post here, you might call them ignorant and choose to not believe them. But the tollbooth guys can rarely be misinformed. Fully aware of this, I still chose to go back the way I came and look for any missed turns once again, all the time trying to look for big landmarks. Oddly, I came across a mcD’s place I had previously ignored. If there was a mcD’s the organizer would obviously tell me so. I had to find a public phone and how do you like it? …the lights were out along the highway. Perfect timing! So I didn’t have a public phone to fall back to either. I went back to the petrol pump which was the only place that had done any good for me that day.

I tried searching for phones there. There were none.
Me: yahan kahin phone hai kya?
Pump guy: nahi
me: emergencies ke liye bhi nahi hai?
Pump guy: haan
me: kahan?
Pump guy: nahi hai
me: andar office mein bhi nahi hai? Emergency hai yaar.
pump guy : nahi hai
me : x-(

I don’t know what possessed me, but I almost immediately asked another guy if there was a phone nearby. he coolly asked me “std ya local?”. I replied, “local”. and then he casually took out his phone and gave it to me. I moved out of the pump and called a more trustworthy guy. Rishabh recharged my phone in about 3 minutes. I got to talking to the guy who had lent me his phone. I was all over him, thanking every 2 words. In passing I just asked about CRPF again. I got the same reply. I tried to reason saying they specifically told me to come towards the Lonavala side. the guy looked at me and said something to the effect of “same side sir”. That’s when the curse of the man answering nature’s call struck me. I had taken the wrong turn at the junction of the highway!!!

By the end of the conversation, I had balance in my phone. I quickly called the organizer to tell him I will be late, but obviously he asked for reason. I tried to explain in as little words as possible, but I don’t think he understood. He was like, how can someone do such a thing; he must be talking about something else. Anyway, I managed to convey that I was about 70-75 kms away from the place I should be. It was about 7:35 in the morning.

I drove the fastest I have in my life for the next hour (later realised my brother has been faster ). took about two breaks in the way. Several clues I received early in the journey were coming back to me. I had passed a looong tunnel I had never passed before. That should have told me I was on the wrong route. Maybe I was too sleepy to process that info. I had even asked a policeman about the location of CRPF. In spite of him saying there is none nearby, I continued searching for an hour. Anyhow, I was on the right track now. If nothing, now I at least knew I could do a longer road trip. Interesting things happened on the way too. For people who don’t know what beats is, here’s a quick description. When you play a tone, it has a particular frequency, when you have another source of almost identical but not exact frequency, the intensity of the combined sound starts to oscillate, giving the illusion of ups and downs in the source. Waves constructively and destructively interfere and the relative phase changes in time giving the ups and downs or beats.
So I was on my bike, riding along in a hurry. I was overtaking cars left and right. One such Trax was at almost the same speed as I was. I was a little afraid of going any faster so I was peacefully overtaking him. It took me about 10-11 seconds to do that. But our engines were somehow firing with same frequency I guess cause as I passed it, I heard the rumble of the engines change into a beat pattern of about 5 Hz. Fun to be in that moment.

Anyhow, I reached the place by 9, dumped my luggage and called for the directions to the site. I reached the site at about 930 in the morning, what should have been 730. But luckily my batch-mates to be were late too and the whole session started after I joined. I thought the day’s quota of bad luck has been quenched. I was going to fly; nothing can (should) go wrong. I wasn’t even in the ball-park of reality.

The morning was already going bad, I knew that, yet I was being reminded of it again and again. Small, irritating things like there had to be cows near the flying site, there had to be cow dung right in the middle of the path I ran on. The harness had to be of the wrong size and there had to be nothing else to replace it with. On the first day, I was supposed to do ground handling of my glider, to get a feel of it and try to control it or at least know when to kill it. The morning session was bad; I was hardly able to control the glider. From its point of view though, it was quite good at it. I was supposed to run with it and guide it left and right. I went left and right all right, but it wasn’t I doing all those things at all. And as if to conform to the trends, the landings were horrible. The glider is supposed to land nice and flat like a horse shoe, instead it landed on its side, formed a lump like a pile of crap and messed up the cables. We ended the morning session soon as the wind started going berserk. That was - 4 attempts at control and no hops. Pathetic in a word.

Afternoon consisted of a hurried lunch which was hurried partly because I was hungry and partly because it was horrible and I wanted to get over with it ASAP. This was followed by a debriefing session where everyone talked about their day and I was kinda glad to find out that everyone had a horrible experience on day one – made me feel optimistic about the evening session. Somehow, I went back that evening feeling that I have learned handling and am ready for hops. Hops are basically micro-take-offs done on flat grounds so that u can practice take-off and landing. The wind was good and strong and everyone was able to do it. I got a new flying glider, different from the ground handling one in that it was slender, inflated fast and was easier to run with. My batch-mates did their hops and it was my turn now. I buckled in, pulled the glider and did a perfect take-off. Powerful run put me in the air in about 3 steps. I was happy, I was flying. The instructor was happy, I had done it on day one
finally, I thought… until…

The trick to take off is to pull on brakes to increase lift. The procedure for landing is almost identical. To land, you pull on the brakes so that the lift and drag increases, allowing you to land at a slower speed and lesser fall rate. The problem with hops is that the take offs and landings are separated by about 2-3 seconds. So unless you are consciously trying to control the brakes, you will land up doing a Shardul. The recipe is so: I pulled the brakes slightly for take-off; the strong winds pulled me up. I didn’t release them so I was higher than others, about 6-8 feet and enjoying it thoroughly. Now the time was to land. I hadn’t released the brakes so during landing I pulled on them harder. The glider was deformed to a large extent and wasn’t really slowing down that easily. I lifted my legs to prevent fall, and landed safely with almost no bang but at the cost of almost sitting down. So now I was trying to get up, while pulling the glider that had its ropes slack. In layman terms, it was an invitation to the strong winds to do what they liked with my glider. And they faithfully blew, sideways, tilting the glider. All this while, I was getting up and trying to run ahead to stop it from slacking. Now, the thing about getting up is that you are in a position that is identical to when you are falling down. You are out of control and running is the natural response to avoid licking the ground. But add to this a glider who is good friends with the wind and you get a train that is bound to run on the laid tracks. I wasn’t running to get up; I was giving the glider feet and speed to go where it wanted to. Around this time, I heard yelling, first asking then commanding me to stop. This is what I was trained for in the morning: how to gain control of such a situation. I said the hell with them; I’ll show them how this is done, if only I can get on my feet. The final yell was loud enough for me to obey. I took a great effort to stop and pull the brakes fully to kill the glider. As I turned to execute the final step, I saw the reason for all the yelling. The glider gently covered the top of a tree. And not just any tree… no no, my luck was bad for the day, remember? It landed on a (swearword) Babul tree, complete with the mushroom shape and covered in nice 3 inch long thorn.

I don’t know if the readers have seen a babul tree. The thorns don’t look sharp but they are. Don’t touch them if you seek to confirm. This is one thing you want to just believe. Ever seen a Velcro? It has two parts. One is the hard surface and the other is soft like cotton. This babul tree is the hard part of nature’s idea of a Velcro. Any damn thing sticks to it and doesn’t come off without tearing some part. And this includes everything from clothes, strings, plastics, leaves, flesh… yeah flesh. Even those surgical needles don’t pierce the skin so easily.

The first thoughts that played through my mind were something like: oh so that’s why they were shouting; wow what a perfect fall – on the tree – oops – did he say 1.25 lakh – oooh
the gliders are pretty expensive and holes are not supposed to be a part of their design. I later found out that the glider really went out of service and was buried after performing the rites in accordance to the scriptures. But wow, I was a costly student for this institute! The rest of the session went in trying to remove the glider and at least salvage the ropes, trying not to tear it completely. The hop that started it all was the only hop I ever had. Hmph.

The events of the evening were too exciting for Avi (the instructor who was the primary voice in the yelling frenzy) to wait till we got back home. Hence the debriefing was done on site. Everyone was describing their flights that they had from the top of the mountain nearby. One guy did some errors in the flight. He wasn’t exactly following instructions. As justification he said, “I was just too thrilled. I was enjoying the view”. Avi couldn’t resist anymore. He had to say it. "Yeah you probably thought what a nice view, nice fields around, cows roaming by, and wow! Look! A glider in a tree.”

Avi’s description of the event later was thus:
“I’ll tell you what he did. He did a perfect take off, nice control and release, then ran like a bull, and went up to quite some height. Then he landed, got up, and ran into the tree. He was like a magnet, swooooop, straight for the tree.”

Bad, bad day. I had just wasted a session in getting the glider off the tree instead of doing hops in preparation for the take-off. The only positive was Avi said everything looked fine, I had nice control and understood brakes so with one or two tries, and I can do an actual flight. But that was in the coming days. Today was still not over.

As I was packing the glider in the bag, a thorn that was trapped inside came out tearing the cloth. Nothing could be done about it. I packed the thing, took the bag to the van and just as I about to load, as if putting cherry on the beautiful cake, the straps came off. I was then baptized, “Shardul, the destroyer”. Catchy I thought.
Everything was wrong that day, even on the trip back an amma started crossing the road while I was speeding by. I honked and any normal person would have either hurried on to the other side or would have stepped back. This one stopped. And worst, she had no idea who honked. So she kept on searching while looking at the wrong side, all this in the middle of the road. Bikes generally come with specifications such as 0-60 in 3 seconds etc. mine can go from 60-0 in 2 seconds I now know.

The day ended with regular logging and a glimpse of the eventful day in my head. I was convinced I should write a blog and record such days for the sake of other’s joy. Optimistically speaking, the day was positively horrible.

*original blog posted on lionsardesai.tumblr.com*